# Freedom of Choice 

## FreeBSD vs Gentoo

Have you ever installed [Gentoo Linux](https://www.gentoo.org/)? If you ever did, then you know how much pain you pass through just to have your Linux box ready to serve your needs. 

[Gentoo](./blog/distros/gentoo.md) installation is a learning process and the worst of it, is when you need to update, which needs to be something like once per week. If you take longer, you will find some USE="Flags" problems in the process, while many other problems can happen before you even boot it from the first time. I encourage you to try, mainly if you are a big FAN of memory usage performance and CPU performance too. Compilation time is your best friend, and hopefully you know to leave the computer away for some time, when compiling software. For exemple, to compile **GCC** that may take several hours. Anyway, when you boot your **Gentoo** for the first time, in case you already **compile the kernel** from the **source**, which you specify which **hardware** you have and which **software** compability you wish to have, the software you install, will be at its best, for your machine **characteristics**. In the other hand, in the last years, Gentoo implement **Binary** packages, to save your **Time**. While Time is saved, you cannot change the default configuration of the package you install, because was made to have all **features**, not only those you need. 

By default in [FreeBSD](https://www.freebsd.org/), you may wish to use **ZFS** partition shema. It will take some memory from you, but if memory is not a problem, continue with ZFS. If Memory is a problem, please choose **UFS**.

With **FreeBSD**, installation is super easy and no problems will come for installing it in your machine (mostly). After than super-fast installation, you can think you are using Gentoo. FreeBSD **ports** have everything you need to start. Use the **whereis** command, to find the programs you wish to install and go into that directory, and install them all, using the **make** command. But wait, before installing anything you should **compile the kernel**. The kernel you are using is **generic** and what you need is only the **code** that make your hardware work. All other hardware devices that you don't have or use, can be removed, which will results in a faster kernel. You can start with **GCC** if you wish, to remember how much time it takes in **Gentoo**, while **FreeBSD** will ask you so many questions in the process of installing one single software, that you can quit from installing it from the source. Even if you can use **pkg** package to install the binary versions, you can escape that annoying problem with **make BATCH=yes install clean**, but keep in mind that some packages have non-desired features included, so you may wish to investigate the **Makefile** of each package you wish to install, to be sure that you will not install, what you don't need. For example **Vim** will install the **X** server. In my perspective this is completly insane, but what can I do against it? 

**Offend FreeBSD developers** :)  

 So remove the **gtk2**, **gtk3**, **motif** and **x11** from **Makefile**.  This is about the **/usr/ports/editors/vim** package, but others can have different packages that you don't need. For example **samba** or **smb**, which is to manage **Window$** filesystems, **telnet** which is a non-secure communication, while can be useful, you can try the secure approach, using **ssh**. To simplify the problem of editing the **Makefile**, use the command **make config**. As another popular example you may wish to install in case you are building a server is [Apache2](https://httpd.apache.org/). You may wish to remove all the **CGI** modules to be sure that have no known vulnerabilities. 

Another awesome feature is that, some packages can be **Flagged** as Vulnerable, mainly when you are trying to compile them from the source. If this happen, compilation will break / stop and some message will be described to "jump off" the problem, which is by adding the option: **make DISABLE_VULNERABILITIES=yes install clean**. I am not sure about the sensation I have when compiling from source, but I think the compilation time is less than Gentoo, while I need to tell you the true: The Truth is, I start compilation and leave computer for some time. The Bike and the Road are always good friends to forget Time.

In case you wish to install something that have deeper dependencies, you may wish to use the command **make config-recursive**, to select the compatibilities of all dependencies, before compiling them. If you think this ncurses-popups are annoying, try to **make install clean** without any extra option, and you will see the hugly side of FreeBSD ports. To enable **services** that you install at **boot time**, like the **ssh-server**, you need to add it to the **/etc/rc.conf** file. For example: **apache24_enable="YES"** or **dbus_enable**, **ssh_enable**, etc.

So, the **lesson** of using FreeBSD is to use this last tips before installing or editing the Makefile of each package from **/usr/ports/**. And always **clean**. If you like to explore more, please check the **Jail** system and the **PF** Firewall. If you wish to build a **Desktop**, I should remember you that the list of packages to install is **Big**. This article is like a motivation to learn more about FreeBSD freedom. I don't really care about the **licenses**, but the usability that gives an opportunity of it's experience. Nothing more. 
